b"Allcargo Logistics Ltd, part of the Avvashya Group, is a logistics firm headquartered in India. Its services comprise global multimodal transport operations (non-vessel-operating common carrier, less than container load, and full container load), pan India container freight stations, inland container depots, third-party logistics, warehousing, contract logistics and logistics parks. The company operates across more than 160 countries through more than 300 offices. As one of India's largest publicly listed logistics companies, Allcargo Logistics has a consolidated turnover of INR 6046.91 Cr as of March 2018.\n\nHistory\nIn 1993, Chairman of Allcargo Logistics Mr. Shashi Kiran Shetty founded Allcargo Logistics as a cargo handling operator at Mumbai port. Initially Allcargo Logistics was a shipping agency house and provided freight forwarding services.\nIn 1995, ECU Line, an Antwerp-based non-vessel operating common carrier (NVOCC), appointed Allcargo as their India agent. In 2003, the company started its first container freight station (CFS) at the largest Indian port, Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT) in Mumbai. In 2007, it started two new CFSs at Chennai (in Tamil Nadu) and Mundra (in Gujarat) ports followed by a second CFS at JNPT in the year 2012. In 2006, private equity firm New Vernon Capital Fund acquired 6.42% stake in Allcargo. In 2008, Blackstone GPV Capital Partners picked up a 6% stake in the company which was later increased to 14.99% in September 2009 by converting warrants worth US$23 million which the global private equity fund subscribed in February 2008.\n\nAcquisitions\nECU Line (2005\xe2\x80\x9306): Allcargo's first acquisition was of the Belgium-based ECU Line, spanning three stages from 2005-06. Allcargo acquired 33.8% stake in ECU Line in June 2005, increased its stake to 49.9% in Jan 2006 with an option to increase the stake further, and acquired the remainder in Jun 2006, making Allcargo Logistics one of the largest NVOCC in the world.  ECU Line's revenues at the time of the acquisition were 4.3 times the revenues of Allcargo Logistics.Hindustan Cargo Ltd. (2006): A former subsidiary of travel and forex major Thomas Cook, Hindustan Cargo is predominantly engaged in air freight forwarding and custom clearance. The company was acquired by Allcargo Logistics in 2006 for an undisclosed amount.Hong Kong-based Companies (2010):Allcargo acquired two Hong Kong-based companies with operations in China (one in Shanghai with 75% stake and the other in Ningbo with 100% stake) for US$22 million.MHTC Logistics Pvt. Ltd (2012): Allcargo acquired 100% equity in MHTC Logistics Private Limited, engaged in project logistics and freight forwarding.Econocaribe Consolidators(2013): Allcargo through its wholly owned subsidiary, ECU-LINE acquired Econocaribe Consolidators, a US based logistics company. Econocaribe specializes in freight consolidation and FCL services to Latin America, the Caribbean, Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, Africa and Asia. It also offers import LCL/FCL transportation services from around the world to the United States and Puerto Rico.FCL Marine Agencies(2013): Allcargo Logistics through its step down wholly owned subsidiary company Ecuhold NV acquired majority stake in FCL Marine Agencies Rotterdam, a Netherlands-based Logistics company.\n\nServices\nMultimodal Transport Operations (MTO)\nAllcargo's MTO service comprises NVOCC operations related to LCL consolidation and FCL activities globally, through its wholly owned subsidiary ECU Line (based in Belgium). Initially Allcargo entered the business of LCL consolidation as agents of ECU Line. With an international network across 89 countries and 189 own offices, the division provides direct export/import and multicity consolidation services.Container Freight Stations(CFS) and Inland Container Depots (ICD)\nAllcargo commenced CFS operations in 2003 at JNPT (near Mumbai). At present it operates in all four CFSs (two at JNPT and one each in Chennai and Mundra-Gujarat). \nIn 2009 Allcargo entered the business of Inland Container Depots (ICD)s. Its first ICD was at Kheda-Pithampur near Indore in the state of Madhya Pradesh, in a joint venture with Hind Terminals (part of the Samsara Group), with Allcargo's stake at 51%. Its second ICD was started at Dadri in the national capital region, in a joint venture) with Container Corporation of India (CONCOR), with Allcargo's stake at 51%. Its services comprise export/import handling, LCL shipments, bonded/open warehousing, first/last mile transportation, maintenance and repair of dry container, reefer monitoring and hazardous material handling. The total installed capacity across its CFSs and ICDs is around 441,000 TEUs per annum.\n\nProject and engineering\nSpecializes in managing end-to-end project logistics, from planning to movement of project cargo, out of gauge / over dimensional cargo, over-weight consignments on turnkey and door-to-door basis, route surveys and multimodal/location transportation. The service also includes a fleet of over 1,000 equipment and specialized vehicles. Complete range of cranes (crawler, telescopic, truck lattice and all-terrain), hydraulic axles and self-propelled modular transporters (SPMTs), strand jacks, trailers (low bed, semi low bed and high bed), fork-lifts and reach stackers.\n\nShip owning and chartering\nThe firm currently doesn't own any ships and has exited the ship owning business given the business conditions\n\nThird-party logistics (3PL) and warehousing\nAllcargo operates customized warehousing and supply through its own warehouses at Goa, Pithampur (near Indore in the state of Madhya Pradesh), Hosur (in the state of Tamil Nadu) and Bhiwandi (near Mumbai in the state of Maharashtra state). It has land banks in Nagpur, Indore, Hyderabad and Bengaluru of nearly 200 acres.\n\nGlobal strategic tie-ups\nMammoet\nA privately held Dutch company founded in 1973 specializing in the hoisting and transportation of heavy objects over water and roads, Mammoet currently has approximately 3,200 employees worldwide, of which over 850 are employed in The Netherlands. Allcargo Logistics Ltd has a strategic tie up with Mammoet in India for providing cranes above 750 Tons and self-propelled modular transporters (SPMTs).\n\nHansa Heavy Lift GmbH\nThe German, Hamburg headquartered, global specialist in transport of heavy-lift, project and break-bulk cargoes through oceans, Hansa Heavy Lift GmbH, currently operates 21 multipurpose heavy-lift freighters - the largest fleet in the heavy-lift and project market globally. Allcargo Logistics Ltd represents Hansa Heavy Lift as their exclusive agent across India.\n\nCurrent shareholding\nAs on 31 March 2013, promoter and promoter group hold nearly 72.1% of the company's shares. Private equity firms Blackstone, New Vernon and Acacia Partners hold approximately 14.4%, 3.0% and 6.0% of the company's shares respectively. The rest is held by a mix of foreign corporate bodies, domestic corporate bodies and general public.\n\nAwards and recognition\n2015 - Samudra Manthan Award- Logistics Company of the Year, 2015 from Bhandarkar Group of Publications\n2013 - Global Indian Maritime Personalityaward from Maharashtra Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (MACCIA)\n2013 - Leadership and Innovation award from International Women Leadership Forum (IWLF)\n2012 - News Maker of the Year award from Maritime and Logistics Awards (MALA 2012)\n2012 - Heavylift Mover of the Year award from MALA 2011\n2012 - Outstanding Contribution Award from Port of Antwerp\n2011 - LCL Consolidator of the Year award from 3rd South East CEO Conclave and Awards\n2011 - Indian Freight Forwarder of the Year award from 1st Northern India Multimodal Logistics Awards\n2010 - Logistics Company of the Year award from MALA 2010\n2010 - Private Container Freight Stations (CFS) Operator in India award from Maritime Gateway Award\n2009 - Logistics Company of the Year award from NDTV Profit\n2008 - Best Logistics Company award from Indian Maritime Gateway Awards\n2007 - Deal of the Year (for the acquisition of ECU LINE business) award from Seatrade\n\n\n== References =="