
Indian Institute of Technology Ropar

The Indian Institute of Technology Ropar (IIT Ropar) or IIT-RPR, is an engineering, science and technology higher education institute located in Rupnagar, Punjab, India. It is one of the eight newer Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs)[2] established by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India under The Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2011[3] to expand the reach and enhance the quality of technical education in the country.This institute is committed to providing state-of-the-art technical education in a variety of fields and also for facilitating transmission of knowledge in keeping with latest developments in pedagogy. It has already established itself as one of the top technological institutes in the country.
Contents
History

IIT Ropar was established by MHRD in 2008. The classes for academic session 2008–2009 were held at IIT Delhi. The Institute started functioning from its transit campus in Rupnagar in August 2009.[4][5]
Campus
Permanent Campus

IIT Ropar has completely shifted to its permanent campus since June 2019.[6] Campus architecture is inspired by Indus Valley Civilisation with four 41 feet high stone carved[7] pillars at the entrance.[8][9][10] The institute started to operate from its permanent campus from July 2018. Some phases of this campus were still under construction. The campus was being built on the land earlier known as Birla Seed Farms. It is located over an area of 525 acres (2.12 km2). Foundation stone for the permanent campus was laid on 24 February 2009 by Union HRD Minister Arjun Singh. The contract was given to CPWD and a Bangkok-based construction company was assigned the task of finishing the first phase.[11] The Computer Science Department has been shifted to this campus in July 2018. A part of the administration office was shifted on 17 June 2018. In June 2019, the Administration and Departments of Electrical, Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering completely shifted to the permanent campus.

The institute in the past operated in two different transit campuses located in Rupnagar.
Transit Campus I
The main academic block of Transit Campus I

The transit campus I of IIT Ropar is former Women's Polytechnic, Rupnagar. The academic and administration buildings of the Women's Polytechnic, Ropar were renovated to accommodate all the requirements of the Institute.

This campus houses four hostels: three for boys (Mercury, Jupiter and Neptune Houses) and one for girls (Venus House). The day-to-day management of hostels is taken care of by a committee consisting of student representatives, faculty members (as Wardens) and administrative staff (caretakers, office-heads).

This campus currently houses the central library of the institute. It also an independent post office and a branch of State Bank of India.

Sports facilities include a cricket field, three tennis courts, a football field, a gymnasium, a basketball court, two volleyball court and also a number of facilities for several athletics. The Students Activity Center (SAC) has a gymnasium and rooms for different activity clubs.
Transit Campus II

Owing to the Ministry of Human Resource Development's (HRD) order for increasing seats, the institute started functioning from an additional transit campus. This campus is being shared by and leased from NIELIT Ropar. It is located adjacent to the permanent campus. Along with the main academic area, the campus has three hostels and three faculty residences.

Transportation to and from the campus is mainly done via the institute buses, that ply between the two transit campuses.
Football Ground inside Transit Campus I
Departments and Centres

The institute currently has 10 departments and 1 multi-disciplinary centre.[12] The departments are:

    Chemical Engineering
    Chemistry
    Civil Engineering
    Computer Science and Engineering
    Electrical Engineering
    Metallurgical and Materials Engineering
    Humanities and Social Sciences
    Mathematics
    Mechanical Engineering
    Physics

The Center for Biomedical Engineering is the multi-disciplinary centre.
Academics
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2018)
Programmes

The institute offers undergraduate programmes awarding Bachelor of Technology in various engineering areas. Admission to these programmes is through JEE Advanced.[13] The institute also offers postgraduate degrees awarding M.Tech. and M.Sc. (Research) in various engineering fields, as well as M.Sc. in basic sciences.[14] Ph.D. courses in various fields are also offered.[15]
Rankings
University rankings
General – international
QS (BRICS) (2019)[16]	107
QS (Asia) (2019)[17]	219
Times (World) (2020)[18]	301-350
General – India
QS (India) (2019)[19]	21
Engineering – India
NIRF (2019)[20]	29
Government colleges:	
India Today (2018)[21]	11

Among government engineering colleges, IIT Ropar has been ranked 11 by India Today[21] and by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in engineering colleges for 2019.[22] The institute has been featured in the QS World University Rankings for the first time in 2018, and was ranked 107 in BRICS[16] and 219 in Asia.[17] The Times Higher Education World University Rankings of 2020 which included almost 1,400 universities across 92 countries ranked IIT Ropar as the top-ranked college in India, sharing the place with IISc Bangalore. [23]
Research
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (April 2018)

IIT Ropar puts immense emphasis on promoting cutting edge research and publications of high quality and not quantity. The institute stresses in inter-disciplinary research areas including Renewable and Clean Energy, Artificial intelligence[24] (AI), Bio-imaging and Bio-instrumentation, and Agriculture and Rural Development.[25] A Central Research Facility has been established encompassing equipment from various departments.[26]

In the academic year 2017-18, the institute organized its first Research Conclave.[27][28]
Extra curricular activities

Zeitgeist is the annual cultural festival of Indian Institute of Technology Ropar and is held annually as a three-day festival in October or November.[29] It was conceived in September 2010. Advitiya, with its maiden edition in 2017, is the annual technical festival, which is held for three days in February or March. An annual sports festival, Aarohan is also held annually during February. It is currently in its second edition.[30] These college fests are managed financially and conducted entirely by the students. An annual Indian classical music and dance event SPIC MACAY[29] is also organized by the students and the faculty.

Events such as Inter Batch Cultural Championship (IBCC) and Inter Year Sports Championship are the intra-college events that are organized annually for the students of the institute.[29][30]

The management of student activities is done by many boards functioning under the Student Affairs Department. These boards have elected student representatives known as General Secretaries, and an overall elected President of the Student Council. They have various societies and clubs to promote extra curricular and co-curricular activities.
Alumni Association
The IIT Ropar Alumni Association was founded on 1 February 2013. The association aims to encourage the alumni to take abiding interest in the progress and development of the institute. Since its establishment, the ass

ociation has grown from strength to strength, regularly undertaking several initiatives to promote and foster mutually beneficial interaction between the alumni and the alma mater.